# Canary Policy
A Mule policy that allows a gateway proxy to support a canary release strategy by dynamically changing the API Implementation host.

## Supported versions
This policy has been tested against the 3.9.X runtime

## A note on API versioning
This policy has been designed to modify the host an API is routed to. For example instead of going to `v1.microservice.mycompany.com` it will send the request to `v2.microservice.mycompany.com`. This versioning strategy may not be appropriate for all use cases, in which case this policy can be modified to support URI based versioning.

# Canary release strategy

Canary release is a technique to reduce the risk of introducing a new software version in production by slowly rolling out the change to a small subset of users before rolling it out to the entire infrastructure and making it available to everybody. Further reading on canary releasing can be found on Martin Fowlers website [here](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CanaryRelease.html)

The canary release begins by deploying the new service into production with no users routed to the service. When this has been tested and validated, the next step is to begin routing traffic to the new service.

There are many strategies to routing the traffic, and this is where an API Proxy running on a Mulesoft gateway comes in. The consumer (client) calls the Gateway, and then the proxy forwards the request to the implementation. By using a policy the canary approach can be implemented via the Gateway.

The policy has been designed to be as flexible as possible rather than dictating how the routing strategy should be executed. By exposing the conditions as MEL fields, the users of the policy can dictate when to trigger the routing.

The following are examples of approaches that can be taken with the policy:

1. Route based on a header presence
2. Route based on a percentage of weighting
3. Route based on a clientID
4. Route based on an IP range (to support internal staff pilots)

A benefit of a canary release is when a certain confidence is achieved in the new service the traffic level routing to the new service can be increased. By using a policy this can be changed without having to deploy any code changes, but via a policy update.

# Policy Configuration

The policy requires four properties to be set which determine the behavior.

## Mel expressions

### Original service MEL expression
This property is the MEL expression that captures when a particular request should be sent to the original service.

For example if you want to route based on the value of a header it would be:
***
`#[message.inboundProperties.'X-Canary-Value'=='Release1']`
***

If you want to route based on a 5% chance of traffic:
***
`#[new java.util.Random().nextInt(101) =< 5]`
***

### New service MEL expression
This property is the MEL expression that captures when a particular request should be sent to the newly deployed service.

For example if you want to route based on the value of a header it would be:
***
`#[message.inboundProperties.'X-Canary-Value'=='Release2']`
***

If you want to route based on a 95% chance of traffic:
***
`#[new java.util.Random().nextInt(101) =< 95]`
***

## Host values

### Original Host
The hostname of the original microservice

### New Host
The hostname of the new microservice

# Policy behavior

The policy outcome will be one of three results:
1. The original host expression matches, and traffic is routed to the original host
2. The new host expression matches, and the traffic is routed to the new host
3. No matches occur, in which case the default value from the `config.properties` file is used (most likely the original)


# Proxy changes to use the policy

For this policy to work the Proxy artifact generated by the Mulesoft API Manager must be modified. The change required is in the `config.properties` file in the downloaded zip. The change required is modifying the implementation.host property to be a MEL expression pointing to a flow variable with a ternary expression to keep the default host as the one specified in the API configuration.

The following script automatically performs this change:
```
zipedit(){

    curdir=$(pwd)
    unzip "$1" "$2" -d /tmp
    cd /tmp
    sed -i'.original' "s/\(implementation.host=\)\(.*\)/\1#[flowVars.host != null ? flowVars.host : '\2']/"  "/tmp/$2" && zip --update -y "$curdir/$1"  "$2"
    rm -f "$2"
    cd "$curdir"
}

zipedit your-downloaded-prozy-zip.3.9.x.zip classes/config.properties
```

`config.properties` before the script has run:
```
api.name=test-proxy
api.version=1
proxy.port=8081
proxy.path=/hello-world/*
proxy.responseTimeout=25000
implementation.host=v1.microservice.mycompany.com
implementation.port=8081
implementation.path=/test

```

`config.properties` after the script has run:
```
api.name=test-proxy
api.version=1
proxy.port=8081
proxy.path=/hello-world/*
proxy.responseTimeout=25000
implementation.host=#[flowVars.host != null ? flowVars.host : 'v1.microservice.mycompany.com']
implementation.port=8081
implementation.path=/test

```

If you need to support URI based canary routing, the MEL expression could be changed to the implementation.path property

# Recommended deployment approach

The recommended approach to using this policy is in the following deployment setup:

* The original microservice is deployed
* A proxy for the microservice is deployed pointing to the original microservice as the default host. The proxy has the attached `modify_proxy.sh` ran against it.
* The new microservice is deployed in an isolated environment with no routing of external traffic to it and is smoke tested
* The canary_policy is applied to the Proxy API in API Manager with the desired routing mechanism
* Traffic is monitored through the proxy and when confidence is achieved in the new microservice, the threshold rates are increased and monitored.
* When full cutover has occurred the original proxy implementation is modified in API Manager to point to the new microservice and the proxy is re-deployed
